And so we're running on, at the moment, we're
running on a pretty constant year to year with not
only the increases that would keep up to the
consumer price index or something. We are
growing. The Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution has actually shrunk a slight amount
in the last three years. We haven't grown at all in
terms of the number of people we have working here
or in terms of the dollars we have when we put them
into non-inflated terms. In other words, that
you're suffering from the process of inflation
like everybody else. I didn't say we were
suffering. I said we weren't growing.
It could be suffering. I didn't say that, though.
You're assuming something there. You're
assuming that vigor is better and that to live is to
grow. And it may be true. I'm not saying that.
That's a separate question. I'm just saying that
our funds have not grown. in real terms, and the
institution has slightly increased. That may be
good. Maybe it's time to retrench a little bit
occasionally. Maybe the best thing that could
happen for any kind of organization is to pause in a
while, and then grow, and then pause, and then
grow. During the pause period, you were able to
retrench and do things you may not do in the hectic
periods of tumultuous growth. Does it seem to you,
as an insider, that the so-called glory days of
oceanography may be ending in terms of funding? I
don't know what you mean by glory days, but I'll
assume that you mean periods in which there were
real increases in budget year after year. No, it
could easily happen again. Oceanography is a
pretty sexy subject, and if it's packaged right,
it'll sell. There are people who'd like to see it
grow again, and I expect it will. If there are
people at Woods Hole who would like to participate
in that growth, then I expect they will because we
have good people here. They're in a position to
capitalize on any opportunities to get increased
funds. There seems to be a movement on the national
level to place all of the oceanographic funds or
all the oceanographic grading institutions
under one central agency, probably in commerce.
Do you approve of that? No, I don't think it's a good
idea. I think one of the strengths of the American
system is its plurality, and that if we lose this,
we lose the ability to correct mistakes. And the
price you pay for plurality is a slight amount of
repetition or duplication. I think in
oceanography this hasn't been great. And we get
our funds from a host of different agencies and
segments of the economy. And what we can't do one
way, we often are able to do another way. And it's
those things we do another way that often in the
long run turn out to be the most important
scientifically or intellectually. And that's
what really counts, not And having a single agency
would be bad for the country. I don't think the
United States needs a single anything. We're a big
country, and we can afford, in most cases, to keep a
pluralistic society. One of the things that
impresses me about this country, as opposed to
countries which have a centralized planning and
economy, they suffer greatly from it. Because if
that central organization makes a mistake, you
don't have very effective ways to redress,
whereas we do. And that makes us stronger.
There also seems to be a trend in oceanography
since the Mansfield Amendment to go more to
directed or practical research, as it's
sometimes called, rather than theoretical
research. Is that your impression?
My impression is that, yes, there are those
pressures. There is a feeling, let's say, in
Congress that they'd like to support science in
general, not just oceanography that's more
applied. I think, though, if you look at most of
oceanography over the years, a good percentage of
it is what you might call applied research. It's
had goals that are fairly well understood, either
by the people who are doing it or by the people who
are funding it, or both. Sometimes both sides
didn't know what the objective was. We looked at
our budget here. A few months ago, we were curious.
As this comment had come up, we went through what we
had. And I've forgotten the number. We had
something like 50% of our work in this institution
could easily be called applied, we felt, just by
looking at what was going on and what its objective
would be. And not in all cases would the people
doing the work agree with that description of
their character, of their work. But we knew from
other factors that there were things going on.
There were people waiting for the results that
they may not have known about in a few cases. OK. Sea
Grant, was it a good idea or a bad idea?
It was a good idea. It's got some problems. Its
major problem today is that it's, I think, is too
narrowly construed in its perspective. And it's a
good idea in the sense that it complemented what we
already had. And in line with my comments I made a
little while ago about pluralism, I think it's
good to have another agency who is interested in
marine or marine-related things that doesn't
overlap with anything else. And it gave us one more
string to our bow. And for that reason, I feel that
Sea Grant is good, and I'd like to encourage its
continued growth. It needs to grow a little bit,
though, because it is a little bit narrowly
conceived at the moment. There also seems to be a
trend for more in-house research of government
institutions. I don't know that I agree with you
about that. There's a natural trend in any
organization to keep things as close to your vest
and do it in-house. The federal agencies would
like to do that. The pendulum swings a little bit,
and maybe the last few years have been
belt-tightening, and they've done it. But if you
look at the, again, I looked at some numbers last
year on this. I was quoting some other numbers a
moment ago. Other numbers, I tried to get the
amount of money used in-house federal
laboratories for ocean research. And I found over
the same period that private laboratories hadn't
grown, neither had that portion of the federal lab
research program. I think there's also an
awareness and part of many congressmen that it
costs more money to maintain a civil servant to do
research than the same amount of research costs
outside universities because of the nature of the
bureaucracy in the federal government and for
other reasons. And this is well known by many of our
congressmen, and I think that if the pendulum
swings too far in the way of in-house research, I
think there will be probably strong steps taken to
spread it around and decentralize. Again, as part
of this pluralism, we have a federal system of
laboratories. We have a private system of
laboratories. We have university laboratories.
We have non-university laboratories. It gives us
ability to do things in a number of ways. And I think
there are forces that try to keep that pluralism in
effect. And certainly, it's a gut feeling of any
guy running a federal lab to keep the money in
house. He's going to want to do that. That's human
nature. But there are forces working against
that, too. Reviewing grant proposals, are you
happy with the review system of grant proposals?
Generally, yes. And you prefer, in effect, peer
review? I thought you meant peer review, yes. I
think the system generally has slight flaws, but
generally I like it. Yes, I think it's a good
system. I realize we were working here, though, on
a system where we don't all, again, this
pluralism, only about half our grants and
contracts in this institution go through the peer
review system, and the other half don't. But I'd
like to have that system. I think keeping it and
keeping it healthy is an important component of
our overall way of doing research. ONR doesn't use
a peer review system. IRDA doesn't use a peer
review system. 15 or more percent of the money we
have for research in this institution comes from
non-federal sources, and that's philanthropy
and foundations and things. They don't use a peer
review system. But I think the peer review system
is important, and I think it ought to be
maintained. I admire the NSF system of doing it. I
think, except I realize there are cases where it
breaks down and somebody, because he has the right
name or the wrong name, does or doesn't get funded
and so forth like that. And those little things do
happen. But overall, I think 90% of the time, it's a
very effective system.
Very good. Do you anticipate working for a federal
foundation or a federal agency in the future?
If I did, I would have done it by now, I think. I've
had lots of job offers frequently. I'm not opposed
to doing it, but I've never found one where I felt it
would be something I really would like doing. But I
have no answer to your question. Would I think it
should be part of my training? Not necessarily. I
know a number of people who've gone and done it.
more effective because they know their way around
washington but there's no more other ways of
learning about management
in effect on the job training then that's one of
them okay i can read about it too okay well you can go
to school you can go to harvard business school
there's all kinds of ways no there's all kinds not
serious all kinds of ways to learn to be a manager
and i think it's good we have a mix i i I don't know why
I'm getting this lecture on pluralism this
afternoon, but I think there is important. I think
if you get all your peas coming out of the same
shell, all the same pod, you're in trouble. You
want to have a mix of people. You want to have some
people who spent time in Washington. You want to
have some people who maybe spent time overseas.
You want to have people who spent time in the
Harvard Business School or something like that.
You want to have this mix. I think it makes a
stronger group. The whole community of
oceanographic management will be stronger if you
have this mix. You don't want them all the same. All
ex-Washington bureaucrats would be terrible.
All anything would be terrible. It would be
terrible, right. I agree with that absolutely.
Next series of questions concern your reaction to
environmentalism,
since you work with Erda and other people. What is
your basic reaction to the environmental
movement?
Well, I think our awareness of environmental
problems has come along very late in our human
habitation of the planet, and many of our concerns
are quite serious. The ocean is important. has an
important role in the environment and in
maintaining the quality of the environment. So
it's important that oceanographers be heavily
involved in the center of this discussion and this
national debate, international debate. There
has been a tendency in some groups, even including
some oceanographers, to overreact on problems.
On the other hand,
there are people who I think are just crying wolf.
On the other hand, I don't believe that we should
back off from environmental questions. In fact,
if we who work at the laboratories that have the
means to get the data don't work on them, then all of
society is going to suffer. So I think it's
important that we work on them. I think it's
important we work on them with as much scientific
purity as we have. We should be intellectually
honest when we do so. And I think most people I know
are. There are a few individuals who are
exploiters or alarmists and the chicken littles,
the sky is falling types. And we find this in every
walk of life in environmentalism. A lot of the
issues, a lot of the environmental issues, I
think, are overdrawn.
Is it fair to say that as a scientist, when someone
says such things as the ocean is dying or you
disturb, do you feel as if it limits your role? It
depends on who says it. And the person who says it is
an oceanographer who has credibility. It bothers
me. Nobody who said it yet, as far as I know, has the
basis for saying that. The ocean is not dying.
There are parts of the ocean which are badly
poisoned. The ocean isn't dying. One or two
species in it may be going extinct. And I wouldn't
underestimate that. I wouldn't like to see the
blue whale disappear. On the other hand, I think we
have to live in a world where we harvest protein.
And whales are part of the protein resource of the
planet. Many people would say we should never
harvest a whale. Don't understand the logic. If
we're going to eat protein, the whale, to me, is no
more sacred than a cow. and run the cattle on the
grange you've got to use both of them effectively
we've got to learn how to harvest whales we
shouldn't this would be we're not using the planet
effectively we don't harvest whales there's
protein and oil and all kinds of things we need
there and there are many crops there as far as i know
there are many species of whales right now which
are harvestable but for technical reasons, which
were unharvestable for political reasons. I
don't believe those political reasons are
well-founded. But I wouldn't like to see the great
blue whale go extinct either. I think that would be
folly. I don't see why we should do that. I'd like to
preserve our environment and the attractive
features in it, but we're living here too, and
man's a carnivore, and we've got to use the animals
where they are, and whales are part of it. There's
an example of what I think of as emotionalism. I
think the whale issue is so tied up with emotion
that we aren't talking straight about it.
Let me try to sum it up and see if I have it right on the
tape, okay? That you would agree essentially
environmentalism is a good thing, but sometimes
it's extremism of its proposed body? Well, I don't
like the word environmentalism, because
immediately that term is pejorative to me. I think
that as marine or as terrestrial scientists,
oceanographers have a responsibility to look at
environmental problems, problems that maintain
the quality of the environment. And many people I
know are doing that and doing it responsibly and
making solid, strong, positive contributions
enabling us to stop some of the abuses that are
going on. There are clearly many abuses going on.
We are poisoning, polluting, and all this kind of
stuff. We need to take action to stop that. Action
can be more effectively done on the basis of good
information, which can be gotten by scientific
research. At the same time, I think the scientists
also have a role in trying to stop some of the
alarmists and publicity seekers who are doing
this for their own ends. And there are a number of
those as well, I'm sorry to say. And some of those
have given environmentalism a bad name. So I bet if
you talk to a lot of American industrialists and
talk about environmentalists, they'll start
foaming at the mouth and talk about those commies
that are trying to keep us from making a profit for
ridiculous reasons. And part of the reason
they're foaming at the mouth Some of the people
associated with the environmental movement have
been irresponsible and haven't looked at both
sides of it. We've got to get enough energy to keep
our houses warm. We've got to get enough food to
eat. Otherwise, we're committing suicide. We've
got to do those things. The question is, how can we
do it in the most effective way? And some of the
so-called environmentalists would have is just
not harvest food and not get energy and kind of turn
their back to things. This is unrealistic. When
you say environmentalists, I don't know whether
that's what you mean or whether you mean
oceanographers who are studying the
environment. Well, I was thinking about the
environmentalist movement itself, not really
quite so much as oceanographers studying the
environment. Well, I'm a little concerned about
the environmentalist movement because I think
it's gone out of hand in many cases. Now, in terms of
oceanographers studying the environment, if I
may ask questions there,
what is the potential of the ocean, would you say?
And there was a time when it was sort of assumed that
the ocean would offer unlimited potential for...
preserving and protecting man on Earth. They talk
about mariculture and... Okay, I'm not an expert.
Let me interrupt you. I'm not an expert on this.
There are people who've done quantitative
studies on what the ocean will do for food. The
ocean will not do everything for food for man.
It'll do a small portion of mankind's total food
needs. maybe, or a significant portion, but not
all, won't provide all our food, it won't provide
all our energy, it won't provide anything, but
it's part of the total contribution to man's food
and energy and so forth, and that is, we don't know
yet how to work it very effectively. But it's now,
some of the statements were made a decade or two ago
about aquaculture and all the rest of it. Many of
them, when looked at quantitatively, turned out
to have been exaggerations.
Now, the next series of questions are personal
questions. What probably surprised you the most
in terms of technical innovations in your
discipline of oceanography? Anything occur that
you didn't expect to occur? What did you think was
the most important technological development in
your field during your career?
It's really a two-part question. Were there any
instruments developed which you didn't
anticipate developing, which you think aided
you? And of the instruments developed, which did
you think were the most important?
No, I don't find your question one that I can
respond to. OK.
Every instrument I've seen, there have been
somebody standing around and said, that
instrument can't be built. building
instruments, for example, is an imagination
combined with some good engineering. We've had
some good engineers here at Woods Hole who've
built a number of instruments that people are
using around the country now, around the world
right now. But I personally never was in a position
where I thought, oh, that'll never, well, any
given instrument, oh, that will never work. And I
was surprised where it just didn't happen that
way. Maybe if I had a mind that works slightly
different, I might have thought that. As for the
kind of I guess the second part of the question was,
well, scientific advice or ideas? What
scientific advance helped you the most? Probably
technological advance rather than scientific
advance. Oh, well, certainly in my own career,
these more current meters are what I worked with.
And it took a decade to get them to work right. And
now they're highly well. They're 95%, 99%, 95%
reliable right now. And they helped me a lot. I
mean, that was my career. In the last few years, it
was a scientist who was based heavily on data
collected from instruments like this. And they
were a completely new instrument. I was involved
heavily with trying to get the darn things to work.
Took several years of my life. Were there any other
technological advances you think in your period
of oceanography that pushed the science forward?
Sort of quantum leaps. In the period when I've been
active, I can't today identify a quantum leap. A
quantum leap might be more easily identified with
some perspective. And if we look at the history of
oceanography, we might find, for example, the
whole last 10 years have been nothing but one big,
huge quantum leap. Certainly, we're doing things
today we didn't do 10 years ago and the same as 10
years before that. There's a whole host of
instruments we think are standard today, CTDs,
pardon the jargon, CTDs, so far floats, current
meters. All these are things that didn't exist 10
or 15 years ago. They're all of which we take for
granted today. And maybe when the history of
oceanography is written from the perspective of
the year 2000 or something, we'll look back and
say, my God, the years of the late 60s, early 70s
were nothing but complete change over the field.
And maybe... I've heard people say that the
biggest change over in the field came about in the
late 50s when oceanography went away from small
sailing ships like the Atlantis into big ships
like the chain where we could work anywhere in the
world anytime, except in ice, let's say. And that
completely changed the nature of the program as we
did. Maybe when we get enough perspective and
we're able to look back, we'll see if the biggest
advance in oceanography came after the Second
World War, 10 years or so after the end of the Second
World War, in the mid to late 50s, when the U.S.
finally was able to get large capability
ocean-going vessels. Maybe. Theoretical
advances in oceanography. Were there any which
simply took you aback in your fields? Those that
you were not expecting to curb?
Well, no, I don't think so, although I've listened
to a number of seminars from theoretical people,
and they come up with an idea, and I'm like, gee,
that's really great. I hadn't realized that would
be like that. But once I heard him explain it, I
thought, oh, that's reasonable. I don't know so
much. I came in just after the period when Henry
Stommel did his most important works. And it's
clear looking now that his ideas about the
westward intensification of ocean currents
changed all our idea, all our theoretical ideas
about ocean circulation. That happened in the
decade just before I came into things. I came into
things in, I came into oceanography in 58, let's
say, and Stommel did his, his important paper on
westward intensification was written in 48. So I
came in 10 years after that, and by that time the,
the fallout had been done, the damage had been
done, and all kinds of people had rushed to get into
the line and write papers cleaning up after him.
In general terms of oceanography now, I don't mean
just in your particular discipline, were there
any theories advanced which took you aback or
seemed amazing? C4 splitting, plate tectonics,
all these things, of course, are already pretty
well debated at the time you come into the field.
No, C4 spreading. And C4 spreading is something
that happened since I've been in the field, but it
hadn't been my field. And no, it didn't take me much
back. I was aware of the debates about
continental drift, pro and con, back when I was a
student. I was aware of mantle convection because
of work I'd done in geomagnetism, and when people
said, oh, it looks like they're spreading at the
center due to expression of crustal
convection and things like that, mantle
convection, seemed reasonable to me. I mean, I
wouldn't have done it. I'm not trying to claim any
wisdom or anything. It just didn't seem
unreasonable to me. Future career. What next?
What do you intend to do? Do you intend to stay as
administrator, return to being an active
oceanographer? What new problems would you like
to attack, if any? I don't know what I'll do. I
haven't made up my mind. It's not obvious that I
will stay as an administrator. I'd like to keep
that option open, and I have the option, I think.
Although it's dangerous staying as an
administrator because your brain cells atrophy.
The nature of research is to quietly get deeply
involved into something with a high degree of
intellectual penetration. The nature of
administration is to give quick, rapid answers to
questions on a variety of subjects so you get a
superficial thing. These two talents fight
against each other. And you've got to watch out
when you're a scientist against the superficial
answer. And you don't do a good job that way. So the
longer you stay as administrator, the more you
begin to take pride in giving a shoot from the hip on
answers. But that's not the way you do good
science. But I don't know what I'm going to do. You
don't have any clearly laid out plans for
research? No. At the moment, I don't have any
clearly laid out plans for research. That's
right. There's a number of things going on that
intrigue me. For example, satellites.
My base is more in instruments. Maybe there's a new
instrument that might allow us to get data to make a
whole new set of things. a whole new set of ideas
about the ocean. My impression looking at them
right now is we're not quite ready for it, so I'm a
little hesitant about it. But there's an example,
maybe something like that. If you were going to
offer advice to a student again, personal advice
to a student, What particular discipline of
oceanography would you suggest he choose? Where
do you think, in a cliche, where's the action going
to be in the future? I don't know. If you ask me, I
can't answer that question. I don't think anybody
knows. I think anybody that says he does it is just
posing. I think that... If you say where the job is
going to be, I can tell you that right now there are
more unemployed biological oceanographers and
maybe geological oceanographers. And I don't
know of any competent unemployed physical
oceanographer. And most chemical
oceanographers are well employed. But who's
going to make the next breakthrough? I don't know.
You might answer that maybe the next big
breakthrough is going to be in biological
oceanography, because men have been kind of
insomniac and disciplined. discipline, and
there hasn't been much out of it for quite a while.
It's the most difficult of all the branches, so
it's so complex. Maybe somebody will do something
quantitative in biological oceanography and
revolutionize everything, but on the other hand,
it's a hell of a job, hell of a field to get a good job
in, because there's too many people in it. Okay. Is
there anything you'd like to add to the table?
No, it's, I can't think so. It's hard to If I had to
replay the tape, I wouldn't give you the same
answers twice. Well, that means we won't replay
the tape, huh? No, of course not. But it's
interesting to have the opportunity for some
self-reflection on some of these questions,
introspection on some of these questions. No, I
can't think of anything else. I can't think of any
question I was dying to have you ask me, so I get it
off my chest. All right. Well, that's good enough.
OK, good.